after 8 and a half months of war in Gaza
the Israeli government still says it
plans to destroy Hamas but there was a
remarkable quote from the spokesperson
of the Israeli Army in an interview rear
Admiral Daniel hagari called into
question the Israeli government's goal
of eliminating
Hamas Hamas is an idea whoever thinks we
can eliminate Hamas is wrong I am not
referring to the Alternatives the
political Echelon has to decide on that
and the Israel Defense Forces will
implement
but this bu of destroying Hamas is
simply throwing sand in the eyes of the
if we don't bring something else to Gaza
then at the end of the day we will get
hus I'm joined now from Washington by
Aaron David Miller a senior fellow at
the Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace and a former US Government adviser
for Arab Israeli negotiations a very
warm welcome how do you interpret those
comments from the IDF spokesperson
Daniel hagari that that Israel saying it
will make Hamas disappear is growing
sand in people's
eyes I mean on the analytical level I
think it reflects what the Israeli
intelligence community and Senior IDF
officials have bleed for quite some time
and it it brings to mind Kissinger's
quip in 1969 at the hi of the Vietnam
War the Guerilla wins if it does not
lose the conventional Army conventional
military loses if it does not win and
the reality is um yes the Israeli have
done Grievous damage uh to hamas's
organized military structure its command
and control it's uh rocket launch
facilities its
Laboratories uh but the reality is uh
Hamas will maintain a military
capacity maybe 10 to 15,000 Fighters and
it will endure either as an
Insurgency or alternatively given the
weakness of the Palestinian national
movement specifically the Palestinian
Authority it will remain a potent Force
able to influence politics in Gaza
either through intimidation co-optation
or both do you think that is just
becoming clear to the IDF at this stage
at the start of Israel's invasion of
Gaza after the October 7th Terror
attacks experts did warn of essentially
Hagar's point that Hamas is an idea that
can't just be Stamped Out by killing its
supporters so why do you think we are
hearing this from him
now well because I think after almost
nine months and it's hard to believe
next month will be the ninth month of
this war the ID IDF and not the
political establishment Mr netan and his
right ring government are doing most of
the fighting they understand how
difficult it is for the IDF to operate
they understand that every time there's
a strike which kills Palestinians or or
worse a mass casualty event that the war
loses
legitimacy
uh particularly in the United States but
in in Europe and other places as well
and they understand that the only way to
if if in fact it's even possible to
defeat anos is to create an alternative
structure an alternative uh set of
governing principles to to facilitate
security and prosperity uh which Gaza
has lacked under hamas's rule since 2007
and the current government of Israel um
simply has no intention of engaging
either the Palestinian Authority or
creating any sort of hope uh in the form
of a political Horizon to to the
establishment of two states for example
so I I think by and large the IDF is uh
not breaking so much with the government
but making it quite clear and I think it
will become an effective pressure point
I suspect in the days and months ahead
on the Netanyahu government do you think
there is a part of prime minister
Netanyahu that also understands this and
understands what the IDF spokesperson is
saying
here there's absolutely no doubt except
the Prime Minister now the longest
governing prime minister in the history
of the state of Israel key domestic
constituency isn't the Israeli defense
FES it's number one his right-wing
Coalition and the maintenance of uh his
prime minister because if he no longer
is prime minister we should have
elections if elections were held in
Israel uh today um most probably Mr
Netanyahu would not be able to form a
government and on trial for bribery
fraud and breach of trust in Jerusalem
District Court he faes the prospects of
a conviction or alternatively a plea
plea bargain uh to avoid jail time which
would mean the end of his political
career so no staying
afloat C catering to the right wing uh
seems to be his uh his Mo and and the
canessa adjourns on July 25th if he
makes it to that day ganessa doesn't
resume again until two weeks before the
American elections and he'd be in a
position then as prime minister to make
a judgment on who the next president of
the United States is going to be and
adjust his tactics accordingly I suspect
barring some uh event that we can't
Divine or foresee um with respect to his
political future we're probably talking
sometime next year well thank you so
much for sharing your insights with us
today that is Aaron at David Miller with
the Carnegie endowment we very much
appreciate your
time let's follow up on that and get AC
cross to Israel and journalist by League
SL joining me from Tel Aviv so more than
eight months into this war we've heard
Israel has not achieved its goal of
eliminating Hamas at this point do most
Israelis believe Israel can in fact
destroy
Hamas well it depends who you ask after
all um today a poll showed that only 36%
% of all Israelis believe in that
absolute victory that benj is talking
about but it depends how do you you find
victory over Hamas because after all you
can destroy hamas's mil military Wing
you can also find an alternative for
Hamas to govern Gaza or other places but
uh the ideology just like Daniel hagari
has said is something that you cannot
defeat so if the absolute Victory is
defeating the ideology then I don't
think this is something that is possible
it hasn't be possible with Isis hasn't
been possible with other um armed groups
or terrorist groups in the past so this
is something that will um keep in being
present in some way or another but it's
absolutely um possible to defeat the
military Wing at some point and that's
something that most Israelis do believe
that is possible and if you frame the
question as whether the military should
continue the operation until
reaching Victory or defeating Hamas then
I think that most Israel Israelis will
agree polls show that as well the even
don't agree that we should go for
ceasefire in order to free the hostages
this is something that is debated in
Israel I think the um numbers are
shrinking but there is still a majority
that believe that defeating Hamas as a
military Wing is possible let's talk a
little bit more about that and the
hostages Israel recently freed four
hostages in a big military operation but
has cautioned that that it won't be
possible to free many other hostages in
this way after statements like this from
hagari do you think pressure has been
growing among a certain sector to reach
a ceasefire and get hostages home that
way through through
negotiation well definitely yes but I
don't think that hagari gave anything
new because everyone knew that it's not
possible to actually free 120 hostages
just this way especially if we're
talking about 40 or 50 of them are still
alive Hamas is absolutely um putting
guards beside them and whether when
excuse me the military getting closer to
them they will shoot them or um
disappear in some way or another in the
tunnels uh so this is not a new
statement andless this is not a new idea
and the pressure is coming from now from
the families of the hostages that are
saying that the only way to see the
hostages back is a deal that has been
proven to be the safest way to bring the
hostages back and I think that many
Israelis I wouldn't say a majority
believe that it's a price that we can
pay a ceasefire in order to reach a
point where the hostages will be free
this is a huge issue of course for the
Israelis we've also seen lots of uh big
anti-government protesters demanding a
change of government how effective do
you think those have been in exerting
pressure on the current government to
hold new
elections well um uh pull just a couple
of hours ago from a leading Israeli
media said that 54% of Israelis do
support these protests do support these
protest to support um um investigating
what happened in October 7th um
something that of course many Israelis
do uh support but when it comes to the
question of Effectiveness this is
another issue because after all
Netanyahu has 64 members in his
Coalition and I don't think that any of
the parties there is willing to
sacrifice themselves in order to uh go
for a new cycle of election that they
will absolutely lose it even if it's not
losing it as um a government maybe the
government will continue because I don't
see I don't see the opposition forming
any other government but they will not
be itar Bing will not be a minister in
any other government than n's government
and also for example would get what they
are getting from nanyu from anyone else
thank you so much for joining us that is
journalist by Le sadine in Tel Aviv